# notes.md

## Intro
* Talk to you about a research project Rob led o computational and qualitative analysis of historical lynching coverage in American newspapers, primarily in the 1800s and 1900s. (Show paper)
* Built on some work that I did with my students analyzing printing hate, making use of an incredible archive of historical newspapers called Chronocoling America. (Show website)
* In both of these projects, we were interested in determining how newspapers covered the system of non-state, extra-judicial violence against African-Americans, and how that coverage might have contributed to the persistence of this system.
* Even though both of these efforts relied on a computational analysis, it took a TON of laborious human work to extract and classify the data we needed and required building a custom software tool to support that work that was (buggy at best). 
* And so for my project for this class, set out to determine the degree to which, if we had just waited a few years, could have successfuly streamlined the process using powerful language models with advanced reasoning models, which many of you have used, like chatGPT. 
* To not bury the lead, the answer is yes, I think some parts of this are suitable for automation with language models. But I also think have to be careful about what is lost in the research process if we use them, and how to get around those limitations.

## Talk about research paper
--The Ida B. Wells Effect: A Novel Computational Analysis of US Newspaper Lynching Coverage, 1805-1963\
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TxlhcnvLoRheILjJWCvbTEcFMMtHbViC/edit
--In final revisions now
--Based on analysis of articles from thousands of newspaper pages, pulled from chron am.
--Used a human-computational process to identify lynching pages, extract articles, and analyze text
--Using a variety of search terms for lynching news, we captured 60,042 newspaper pages in the Library of Congress Chronicling America newspaper database. We used data tools to extract text and metadata from digitally scanned newspapers; these tools allowed for an examination of historical newspaper content, from article text to placement and display of articles on a page. 
--computational textual analysis, topic modeling, and traditional content analysis to determine major themes and tropes in the news narratives. 
--Longer time series analysis than before, finding temporal and thematic trends. 
--Also compared white and black press. 

RQ1: When did lynching emerge as a recognizable and consistently covered story in US newspapers?
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TxlhcnvLoRheILjJWCvbTEcFMMtHbViC/edit?disco=AAABV3i9OdU
--Our ability to examine lynching news coverage across a broad time period led to another important discovery: news coverage we examined proportionally began to exceed lynchings in 1897, according to a ratio measuring the two. 
--Theorized that growth in the 90s was the IDA wells effect, 1892 and 1895 investigations.  One likely factor was the pioneering anti-lynching work of Black journalist Ida B. Wells, who launched two major journalistic investigations in 1892 and 1895 and went on a series of speaking tours in Great Britain in 1893 and 1894 that gained international attention.


RQ2: Did predominantly white-owned newspapers consistently offer narratives that justified, excused or soft-pedaled lynching, and did this coverage change across time?
* Yes.  High percentage described as orderly mob, emphasized "citizens" who made up the mob.  Treated lynching as an expected outcome, even if some decried it
* In the sample of predominantly white newspaper coverage from the 1880s, a decade of escalating violence against Black Americans, our review showed lynch mobs were described as orderly nearly one in five times. In other decades, the orderly mob narrative was present in 4% to 8% of the samples reviewed. 
* A recurring narrative involved local citizens’ impatience with the pace of legal proceedings and a desire to exact a quick form of justice against a suspected criminal. “When Judge Lynch's decree had been issued, there was no possibility for an appeal on hair-splitting technicalities, nor did sentimental pleas avail,” the Caucasian of Shreveport, Louisiana, in 1913 wrote. On some occasions, newspapers even predicted a lynching would occur, such as a 1902 report in the Alexandria (VA) Gazette (see Figure 12).https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TxlhcnvLoRheILjJWCvbTEcFMMtHbViC/edit?disco=AAABV3i9Od4


RQ3: How did coverage in Black and white newspapers compare across time? Were the dominant narratives about lynching similar or different and in what ways?
The Black press described lynching as a battleground in a broader social and political movement for equal rights, citing Jim Crow laws. White newspapers, by contrast, typically portrayed lynching victims as dehumanized “Black brutes,” deemed guilty before any trial. Lynchings often were portrayed as isolated events in white newspapers, devoid of broader political and social context. 
The Black press generally emphasized that lynching was a crime and advocated for anti-lynching laws while also focusing on attempts to prosecute lynch mobs. As a result, legislation, investigations, and prosecutions of lynchers were dominant narratives in the Black press coverage as seen in Figure 14. 


## Talk about dataset we used Chron Am
--Good things: a ton of newspapers in it; LONG historical coverage; API access and raw image access to work with computational access; Broad geographic coverage; FREE and accessible (good luck using newspapers.com); A good amount of scholarship using it as a computational source
--Bad things: spotty OCR quality; page level text, not article level text; coverage may be long and geographically broad, but huge gaps both temporally and geographically; article layout is complex (modern newspapers have a familiar rhythm); Huge newspaper type gaps too (not a lot of black newspapers), but you do get like russian language or german papers randomly; Just stops at certain point because of copyright issues. 

## Overcomign those issues -- getting to article level data 
--- Article level = hard, because of old newspaper layout. 

--- When we started this research, there were some tools to extract article level stuff from historic papers. But not great.  And state of art OCR was much better than it was, but still not ... awesome. 
--- Required a mix of comptuational and manual processes to extract articles, which was also hard. 
--Narrowed nubmer of pages to examine by writing complex regexes to identify lynching pages.  THIS KEYWORD SEARCH HAS LIMITATIONS
--Used computer vision model to identify articles on pages.
--Built tool to allow human reviewers to tag and extract articles. 
--- And then had to go in and manually extract them at the article level. Built a custom tool to do that (Article Extractor). This took a ton of bodies! 
--- And then we had to go in and classify themes to answer key questions. 


## Original Task
--Set out to determine whether we could use advanced computer vision models, language models and other computational tools to extract
--Started looking and figured out someone did this already. So no need to reinvent the wheel

## Oh, so you're telling me there's a better way
--- American Stories. https://dell-research-harvard.github.io/resources/americanstories 
--- https://arxiv.org/pdf/2308.12477
---novel deep learning pipeline that incorporates layout detection, legibility classification, custom OCR, and the association of article texts spanning multiple bounding boxes
---did this scroll down here to show table at very bottom https://dell-research-harvard.github.io/resources/americanstories 
--- LLM classification
--- Spent a lot of time figuring out how ot work with this data. 
--- Wrote several python scripts and a little command line program to do X. 
## 

## Next Task -- modified research questions, and today I'll talk you through one of them in some depth.
Can a large language model accurately classify a corpus of article texts that does or does not necessarily contains lynching keywords as a) a story that describes a lynching event or b) a story that does not describe a lynching event? YES. 
--Why this matters.  We can throw all of the stories at thsi model, and have it pick out, instead of doing just regex.  And it overcomes the false positive issue -- "this story is about lynchburg va or this story is about John Lynch". Could get a broader sample.   
--Also has implications for identifying additional coverage but also expanding list of known lynching victims with a larger set.

## System I built to do this. 
Talk you through how this works
Need to have something to evaluate performance against.
Built a human classified training set of 133 articles.  If building a traditional machine learning model and training it, I might have used the whole thing
--Show pivot table




--Can a large language model accurately classify a corpus of article texts that contains lynching keywords as a) a story that describes a lynching event in a given paper’s coverage area or b) a story that does not describe a lynching event in a given paper’s coverage area? STILL WORKING ON THIS   
Can a large language model accurately identify the existence of one or more pre-selected narrative themes in an individual article text, including language that normalized or excused extra-judicial lynchings?   
STILL WORKING ON THI


Built tool to do X. 
--- Because of that, limited scale; can't manually extract every article
--- Used regex to filter dataset, which was insane, because of spelling and other issue (Look at this insane regex)

--Talk about problems with chron am
Step 1. Download American Stories (Download American Stories Data.Py)

Step 2. 


Jakc regex "lynchings?\W+of\W+(the\W+)?((\w+\W+){1,2})?colored" "(murderer\|fiend\|desperado\|brute)\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?lynch(ed\|es\|ing)?(\W+\|$)"    "coloreds?\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?((was|were)\W+)?lynch(ed|es|ing)?(\W+|$)" "lynchings?\W+of\W+(the\W+)?((\w+\W+){1,2})?negro" "mob\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?(hung\|hang(ed\|ings?\|s)\|lynch(ed\|es\|ing)?)" "negro(e?s)?\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?((was\|were)\W+)?lynch(ed\|es\|ing)?(\W+\|$)"    "lynchings?\W+of\W+(the\W+)?((\w+\W+){1,2})?colored"_num_matches    "(murderer|fiend|desperado|brute)\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?lynch(ed|es|ing)?(\W+|$)"\_num_matches "coloreds?\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?((was\|were)\W+)?lynch(ed\|es\|ing)?(\W+\|$)"_num_matches    "lynchings?\W+of\W+(the\W+)?((\w+\W+){1,2})?negro"_num_matches    "mob\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?(hung|hang(ed|ings?|s)|lynch(ed|es|ing)?)"_num_matches    "negro(e?s)?\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?((was|were)\W+)?lynch(ed|es|ing)?(\W+|$)"\_num_matches Unnamed: 0 "lynchings?\W+of\W+(the\W+)?((\w+\W+){1,2})?colored"\_start_idx "lynchings?\W+of\W+(the\W+)?((\w+\W+){1,2})?colored"\_end_idx "lynchings?\W+of\W+(the\W+)?((\w+\W+){1,2})?colored"\_cost "lynchings?\W+of\W+(the\W+)?((\w+\W+){1,2})?colored"\_SEARCH_cost_threshold "coloreds?\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?((was\|were)\W+)?lynch(ed\|es\|ing)?(\W+\|$)"_start_idx    "coloreds?\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?((was|were)\W+)?lynch(ed|es|ing)?(\W+|$)"\_end_idx "coloreds?\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?((was\|were)\W+)?lynch(ed\|es\|ing)?(\W+\|$)"_cost    "coloreds?\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?((was|were)\W+)?lynch(ed|es|ing)?(\W+|$)"\_SEARCH_cost_threshold "lynchings?\W+of\W+(the\W+)?((\w+\W+){1,2})?negro"\_start_idx "lynchings?\W+of\W+(the\W+)?((\w+\W+){1,2})?negro"\_end_idx "lynchings?\W+of\W+(the\W+)?((\w+\W+){1,2})?negro"\_cost "lynchings?\W+of\W+(the\W+)?((\w+\W+){1,2})?negro"\_SEARCH_cost_threshold "negro(e?s)?\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?((was\|were)\W+)?lynch(ed\|es\|ing)?(\W+\|$)"_start_idx    "negro(e?s)?\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?((was|were)\W+)?lynch(ed|es|ing)?(\W+|$)"\_end_idx "negro(e?s)?\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?((was\|were)\W+)?lynch(ed\|es\|ing)?(\W+\|$)"_cost    "negro(e?s)?\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?((was|were)\W+)?lynch(ed|es|ing)?(\W+|$)"\_SEARCH_cost_threshold "mob\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?(hung\|hang(ed\|ings?\|s)\|lynch(ed\|es\|ing)?)"\_start_idx "mob\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?(hung\|hang(ed\|ings?\|s)\|lynch(ed\|es\|ing)?)"\_end_idx "mob\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?(hung\|hang(ed\|ings?\|s)\|lynch(ed\|es\|ing)?)"\_cost "(murderer\|fiend\|desperado\|brute)\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?lynch(ed\|es\|ing)?(\W+\|$)"_start_idx    "(murderer|fiend|desperado|brute)\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?lynch(ed|es|ing)?(\W+|$)"\_end_idx "(murderer\|fiend\|desperado\|brute)\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?lynch(ed\|es\|ing)?(\W+\|$)"_cost    "mob\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?(hung|hang(ed|ings?|s)|lynch(ed|es|ing)?)"_SEARCH_cost_threshold    "(murderer|fiend|desperado|brute)\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?lynch(ed|es|ing)?(\W+|$)"\_SEARCH_cost_threshold batch "lynchings?\W+of\W+(the\W+)?((\w+\W+){1,2})?colored"\_CLEANING_cost_threshold "coloreds?\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?((was\|were)\W+)?lynch(ed\|es\|ing)?(\W+\|$)"_CLEANING_cost_threshold    "lynchings?\W+of\W+(the\W+)?((\w+\W+){1,2})?negro"_CLEANING_cost_threshold    "negro(e?s)?\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?((was|were)\W+)?lynch(ed|es|ing)?(\W+|$)"\_CLEANING_cost_threshold "mob\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?(hung\|hang(ed\|ings?\|s)\|lynch(ed\|es\|ing)?)"\_CLEANING_cost_threshold "(murderer\|fiend\|desperado\|brute)\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?lynch(ed\|es\|ing)?(\W+\|$)"_CLEANING_cost_threshold    "lynchings?\W+of\W+(the\W+)?((\w+\W+){1,2})?colored"_passed_cleaning    "coloreds?\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?((was|were)\W+)?lynch(ed|es|ing)?(\W+|$)"\_passed_cleaning "lynchings?\W+of\W+(the\W+)?((\w+\W+){1,2})?negro"\_passed_cleaning "negro(e?s)?\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?((was\|were)\W+)?lynch(ed\|es\|ing)?(\W+\|$)"_passed_cleaning    "mob\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?(hung|hang(ed|ings?|s)|lynch(ed|es|ing)?)"_passed_cleaning    "(murderer|fiend|desperado|brute)\W+((\w+\W+){1,2})?lynch(ed|es|ing)?(\W+|$)"\_passed_cleaning


The Ida B. Wells Effect: A Novel Computational Analysis of US Newspaper Lynching Coverage, 1805-1963\
Introduction

This project explores US newspaper reporting on lynching through a longitudinal examination of a large dataset of lynching news coverage stretching from 1805 through 1963. Lynching increased in the US South after the Civil War as a method to impede Black people from exercising their newly granted constitutional rights and to intimidate them into acquiescing to a white supremacist social, economic, and political order. By the 1920s, 95 percent of lynchings in the United States occurred in the South, and 90 percent of these lynching victims were Black (Brundage 2021, 84).

Using a variety of search terms for lynching news, we captured 60,042 newspaper pages in the Library of Congress Chronicling America newspaper database. We used data tools to extract text and metadata from digitally scanned newspapers; these tools allowed for an examination of historical newspaper content, from article text to placement and display of articles on a page. Finally, we used a mix of computational textual analysis, topic modeling, and traditional content analysis to determine major themes and tropes in the news narratives. Our study fills a major gap in existing literature by offering a more comprehensive examination of how newspapers covered lynching across time. Our work is geographically and temporally broader than pioneering studies of lynching in the United States by W. Fitzhugh Brundage (2021), Michael J. Pfeifer (2011), and Charles Seguin (2019). Like these scholars, we found that white newspapers perpetuated racist narratives that contributed to racial violence, including the torture and deaths of Black Americans through the practice of lynching. Our ability to examine lynching news coverage across a broad time period led to another important discovery: news coverage we examined proportionally began to exceed lynchings in 1897, according to a ratio measuring the two. Until this point in time, our research found, news coverage lagged in proportion to the number of lynchings. In addition, while actual lynchings peaked in the early 1890s and then began declining, news coverage picked up considerably in the 1890s. Why would newspaper editors wake up to the lynching story during this period? One likely factor was the pioneering anti-lynching work of Black journalist Ida B. Wells, who launched two major journalistic investigations in 1892 and 1895 and went on a series of speaking tours in Great Britain in 1893 and 1894 that gained international attention. Besides the “Ida B. Wells effect,” other reasons for increased news coverage could be the spike in lynchings in the early 1890s, the rise of gruesome “spectacle lynchings” as public events, the expansion of the newspaper industry, the rise in sensational “yellow journalism,” the rise of Black activism in the public sphere, and the emergence of the New South movement, which viewed lynching as bad for the business climate. Implications of this finding are significant. The “Ida B. Wells effect” suggests Wells’s journalism helped expand the public discourse on lynching in white newspapers to an extent not previously understood by scholars. The finding also aligns with previous assertions that white newspapers substantially under-covered lynching at a time when racial violence was exploding in the post-Reconstruction era as Jim Crow was being built (Carrigan 2004, 133). Our study also adds a new dimension to the historiography of lynching by comparing narratives in white and Black newspapers over time. The contrast in the coverage is stark. Black newspaper articles tended to emphasize civil society narratives such as the need for due process in the legal system. By contrast, many news reports in predominantly white newspapers sought to normalize the extra-legal violence of lynching by describing members of lynch mobs as “the best citizens” or “leading men” seeking to pursue justice. We also found that syntax in white newspaper coverage provided cover for lynch mobs, with the frequent use of passive construction to avoid naming actors responsible for racial violence. Our findings build on recent research in Journalism and Jim Crow: White Supremacy and the Black Struggle for a New America (2021), which documents in rich detail how white Southern newspaper leaders not only reflected white supremacist social norms in their newspapers’ content but also played an active role in building white supremacist social and political economic systems across the Southern states for generations after the Civil War (Forde and Bedingfield). It is important to note that Black and white newspapers in the US existed in largely separate public spheres from the early nineteenth century, when the first Black newspaper was published, through at least the mid-1960s. The majority of white newspapers across the time period we studied, with the occasional exception of the white Abolitionist press, largely did not cover Black American life. The coverage that did appear was broadly derogatory and racist. Black Americans published their own newspapers to build a counter public, to cover their communities, to “elevate the race,” and to mount fight after fight for civil rights, democratic inclusion, and justice. Literature Review

Databases constructed by leading scholars have documented 5,039 lynchings from 1865-2020 (Updated Beck-Tolnay, 2022), with the bulk of the violence occurring after the US Civil War and waning around World War I. Tolnay and Beck (1995) verified 2,805 lynching victims in 10 southern states from 1882 through 1930, a project that extended the early lynching inventories created by the Tuskegee Institute (1912), the NAACP (1919), and the Chicago Tribune (1882). As historian Leon Litwack (1998) explained, “Between 1890 and 1917, to enforce deference and submission to whites, some two to three black southerners were hanged, burned at the stake, or quietly murdered every week” (284). Lynchings began to wane as the South witnessed economic and social progress in the wake of the First World War. Brundage (1993) wrote: “As the South became increasingly urbanized and industrialized, lynching would no longer be condoned and the practice finally would be suppressed" (9).

Lynching, as defined by the NAACP, is “the public killing of an individual who has not received any due process,” often carried out by lawless mobs (NAACP, 2003). While our study is guided by the NAACP definition, which has informed past scholarship, it is important to note that public understandings of what lynching was, and whether it was legitimate, varied widely across the time period we examine. As Christopher Waldrep (2002) demonstrated in his pathbreaking work The Many Faces of Judge Lynch, the term “lynching” has a long and complicated history that evolved after its first appearance in Virginia in the revolutionary period, when the term denoted a form of highly localized, extralegal communal justice that was yet to be racialized (2-12). The word “lynching” entered national discourse in the mid-1830s, when newspapers across the country reported on a mob that hung five white gamblers in Vicksburg, Mississippi, fearing they planned to foment a slave insurrection (27-38). By Reconstruction, a period of roughly 12 years following the end of the Civil War in 1865, lynching had come to mean community-supported violence that, though extralegal, was justified. During Reconstruction, white Southerners committed frequent violence against their formerly enslaved neighbors, including many killings, yet newspapers did not portray lynchings as a practice targeting Black people (67-78). It was not until the 1890s, Waldrep noted, that many Americans came to view lynching as a racialized practice, largely due to the anti-lynching reporting of journalist Ida B. Wells (109-116). While understandings of the legitimacy and racialized nature of lynching changed across our study’s time period, these shifts do not impede our analysis, which focuses on how newspaper narratives about lynching evolved across time.

In the antebellum period, lynching was used to enforce the law in rural and frontier communities with underdeveloped legal systems. Virginians in the revolutionary era used the term “lynching” in "a self-conscious attempt to legitimate their violence" (Waldrep 2002, 9). Lynching was a form of “rough justice” occurring in all regions of the country (Pfeifer, 2004, 3). Immigrants from North Britain in the mid-to-late eighteenth century introduced traditions of organized violence from England, Scotland, and Ulster to the American backcountry, setting the stage for the vigilantism that arose before the Civil War. This led to the creation of regulator movements among yeoman farmers, who engaged in severe but generally non-lethal violence (Pfeifer 2011, 14). This situation was particularly pronounced in frontier regions. By the early nineteenth century, this regulator violence shifted to hangings often described as lynchings (15). In California, editors of the San Francisco Alta California in 1851 defended lynching as a means for frontier communities to maintain social control and predicted the practice would end once the state urbanized (65).

Enslavers rarely lynched those they enslaved because doing so would destroy an investment and a source of labor on plantations. After the end of slavery, lynchings significantly increased as a means of white control of the Black population in a post-slavery society. During Reconstruction, lynching became a highly racialized practice, although this shift in the practice was not widely recognized. Journalist Ida B. Wells and other Black American journalists and activists in the late nineteenth century documented the lynchings of Black Americans as part of a campaign to eliminate the practice. The shifting definitions and practices are significant and speak, as Lisa Arellano (2012) wrote, to “the complex narrative space that lynching stories often occupy” (12).

Historical studies of lynching have largely focused on particular regions of the country and discrete periods. Pfeifer examined lynching from 1874-1947 in the context of the evolution of legal criminal processes in the rural South and frontier West (2004). Brundage’s case studies of Georgia and Virginia from 1880-1930 explored lynching as a mechanism for white social control of Blacks in the cotton economy (1993). Gonzales-Day examined lynching in California and the West, extending lynching scholarship beyond the South by documenting 352 mob killings from 1850 through 1936 (2006). Carrigan’s study of lynching violence in central Texas from 1836-1916 explored the cultural foundations for vigilante justice, noting the widespread acceptance of the practice as whites began to settle in Texas and faced conflicts with Mexicans and Native Americans (2004). Spectacle lynchings emerged in the late 1880s and early 1890s, Amy Louise Wood observed, at a time when Southern communities faced upheaval during a transformation into modern, more urban societies, where towns saw an influx of outsiders seeking employment and new industries that challenged the established social order (2009). Lynching rituals and their narrative representations served to enforce racial unity and superiority among whites (8). Our study, with its focus on newspaper coverage of lynching, examines such coverage across eras. Lynching and News Coverage By analyzing press coverage of lynching across several centuries, our study attempts to fill a major void in both lynching studies and journalism studies. As Brundage recently noted, “The inextricably bound histories of American journalism and lynching remain understudied and largely unacknowledged" (2021, 109). Prior academic research on lynching news coverage has been episodic, such as Harry Amana’s review of Ida B. Wells's investigations of lynching (2000); Arellano’s examination of Wells’s ability to dismantle the narrative of “ideal vigilantism” (2012); Dora Apel and Shawn Michelle Smith’s examination of lynching photography, which describes the ethical and emotional complexities of viewing such visuals (2007); Waldrep’s study of the evolution of the term “lynching” (2002); and Kristin Gustafson’s study of white Minnesota newspaper coverage of a local 1920 lynching (2008). Brundage provided an excellent analysis of the racist tropes, melodrama, and errors in white newspaper lynching coverage, yet his analysis does not rely on an comprehensive examination of US press coverage (2021). Scholars have pointed out white newspapers’ tendency to provide graphic depictions of lynchings of Black victims and portray members of white mobs as orderly and upstanding citizens, thereby lynching normalized the behavior of lynch mobs (Brundage 2021; Eaton 1942). Newspapers also tended to print news briefs instead of more detailed stories of lynchings before the 1890s (Brundage, 2021). Other studies showed how white newspapers followed racist practices and beliefs in the broader society that helped reinforce white supremacy (Ayers 1992, 132, 153). Such reporting played out against the late nineteenth and early twentieth century emergence of sensational news coverage known as yellow journalism, where newspapers exploited issues such as sex, crime, and graphic content in stories and illustrations to maximize sales. Some newspapers engaged in “impostures and frauds of various kinds, such as ‘faked’ interviews and stories, misleading heads, pseudo-science” (Mott 1966, 539). While Black newspapers increased steadily in number after the Civil War, the first mass circulation Black paper, the Chicago Defender, did not appear until 1905. Many Black papers in the nineteenth century were short-lived due to economic constraints in the Black community and, in the South, due to anti-Black violence. As we will discuss, only 14% of the articles in our sample are from Black newspapers, and in the critical decade of the 1890s, only 5%. Finally, the Black and white press unsurprisingly covered lynching in vastly different ways: the Black press opposed and fought against lynching, while the white press frequently excused and justified it, and sometimes even encouraged it.

Impact of Ida B. Wells Since the first Black newspaper emerged in the United States in 1827, the Black press has played an essential role in Black freedom and liberation struggles (Carroll 2017; Haywood 2018; Washburn 2006). In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, as white America turned its back on Reconstruction’s constitutional and legislative promises of Black citizenship and equality, the Black press mobilized Black publics to fight against Jim Crow and for Black political, economic, and social rights. Jim Crow laws and norms were built from the end of Reconstruction through the 1960s to legalize and enforce racial segregation in the US. Almost all Black leaders of this period were also journalists (Haywood 2021). Ida B. Wells was one of the most well-known, and militant, Black leaders of her era (Bay 2009, 191). Her 1892 editorial in the Memphis Free Speech and Headlight that protested the lynching of three Black businessmen, one of whom was a close friend, resulted in a white mob burning her newspaper offices; Wells herself avoided lynching because she was out of town at the time. She was forced into exile in the North, never to live in the South again. The searing experience led Wells to write Southern Horrors: Lynch Law in All Its Phases (1892) and Red Record: Tabulated Statistics and Alleged Causes of Lynching in the United States (1895), pamphlets that compiled lynching statistics from white newspapers to refute claims that Black men were sexual predators of white women (Amana 2000, Libertz 2021; Waldrep 2000). She described cases where white women engaged in consensual sex with Black men, which led to white outrage. Scholars in our own era have corroborated Wells’s arguments, identifying sexism and the vulnerable white woman as stereotypes in newspaper coverage of lynching, portrayals that framed Black men as the “violent black male rapist” and dangerous members of society (Freedman 2011, 497). Wells’s journalism was so powerful because it helped redefine lynching not as an act of community justice but as a racialized, violent system of controlling Black Americans. As Arellano (2012) observed, “Ida B. Wells effectively challenged lynchers in the most powerful way possible—by dismantling the narratives used to justify and define their violent practices” (111). Soon after her move North, Wells embarked on a speaking circuit and a public campaign to oppose lynching that immediately gained attention in the white press. The Philadelphia Inquirer, for example, in September 1892 described “the celebrated Miss Ida B. Wells” as a keynote speaker of the National Afro-American Press Association meeting where she “eloquently denounced the lynching so popular in some parts of the Union” (Inquirer, 1892). Wells also worked with female temperance leaders both in the US and the United Kingdom, where she had speaking tours in 1893 and 1894. These high-profile speaking tours, which received widespread coverage in the British press, were designed to pressure the US government to act against lynching (195). Wells’s anti-lynching campaigns “permanently altered” British discourse and viewpoints on American lynchings, Sarah Silkey (2015) noted. Her second tour of Great Britain led to the formation of the English Anti-Lynching Committee, which included 20 members of Parliament and other English elites (Paisana 2016, 197). However, the white American press generally did not accept Wells’s arguments and often vilified her. The New York Times, for example, called Wells “a slanderous and nasty-minded mulatress” and accused her of defaming white women of the South as willing sexual partners of Black men (“British Anti-lynchers” 1894). It was her “death-defying” work that ultimately led to Wells posthumously being awarded a Pulitzer Prize in 2020 (Diverse Education, 2020). Research Questions

We sought to answer three primary research questions, informed by lacunae and arguments in the existing literature, about US newspaper coverage of lynching from 1805 to 1963, and the long historical expanse of lynchings covered in the Library of Congress’s Chronicling America collection of digitized historical US newspapers. Our study asks questions meant to fill gaps in knowledge about lynching news coverage across time.

RQ1: When did lynching emerge as a recognizable and consistently covered story in US newspapers?

RQ2: Did predominantly white-owned newspapers consistently offer narratives that justified, excused or soft-pedaled lynching, and did this coverage change across time?

RQ3: How did coverage in Black and white newspapers compare across time? Were the dominant narratives about lynching similar or different and in what ways?



